Open3DQSAR
----------

An open-source software aimed at high-throughput
chemometric analysis of molecular interaction fields

Paolo Tosco (a,*), Thomas Balle (b)

a) Department of Drug Science and Technology,
   University of Turin, via Pietro Giuria 9, 10125 Torino, Italy;
   e-mail: paolo.tosco@unito.it

b) Department of Medicinal Chemistry,
   The Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
   2 Universitetsparken, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark

http://open3dqsar.org




Open3DQSAR is an open-source tool aimed at pharmacophore exploration by
high-throughput chemometric analysis of molecular interaction fields
(MIFs). Open3DQSAR can generate steric potential, electron density and
MM/QM electrostatic potential fields; furthermore, it can import GRIDKONT
binary files produced by GRID and CoMFA/CoMSIA fields (exported from SYBYL
with the aid of a small SPL script).

Subsequently, Open3DQSAR performs fast, automated PLS chemometric analysis
of MIFs allowing to quickly generate and challenge the predictivity of many
3D-QSAR models using different training/test set combinations,
superposition schemes, variable selection and data scrambling procedures,
etc. High computational performance is attained through implementation of
parallelized algorithms for MIF generation, PLS model building and
validation, variable selection.

Prominent features in Open3DQSAR include:

    * Seamless integration with OpenBabel, PyMOL, gnuplot

    * Multi-threaded computation of MIFs (both MM and QM); support for
      MMFF94 and GAFF force-fields with automated assignment of atom types
      to the imported molecular structures

    * Comprehensive output, including SDF molecular databases, 3D maps and
      many different plots to ease immediate evaluation of results in
      PyMOL, MOE, Maestro, SYBYL and gnuplot

    * User-friendly interface to all major QM packages (e.g. GAUSSIAN,
      FIREFLY or GAMESS-US), which allows calculation of QM electron
      density and electrostatic potential 3D maps from within Open3DQSAR

    * User-friendly interface to Molecular Discovery GRID to compute GRID
      MIFs from within Open3DQSAR
    
Open3DQSAR is aimed at fast, automated exploration of a large number
of models originated by different training/test set combinations,
superposition schemes, variable selection procedures, etc. High
computational performance is attained through implementation of
parallelized algorithms for PLS model building and validation, exploiting
the full power of multi-processor machines.
Open3DQSAR is controlled through a command line interface; commands can
be either entered interactively from a command prompt or read from a
batch script. If PyMOL is installed on the system while Open3DQSAR is
being operated interactively, the setup of 3D grid computations can be
followed in real time on PyMOL's viewport, allowing to tweak grid size
and training/test set composition very easily (take a look at the gallery
for some examples) .
The main output is arranged as human-readable plain ASCII text, while
a number of additional files are generated to store data and to export
the results of computations for further analysis and visualization with
third party tools. In particular, Open3DQSAR can export 3D maps for
visualization in PyMOL, MOE, Maestro, SYBYL, and can generate graphical
statistic output ready to be imported into gnuplot.
Open3DQSAR is written in C; while pre-built binaries are available for
mainstream operating systems (Windows 32/64-bit, Linux 32/64-bit, Solaris
x86 32/64-bit, Intel Mac OS X 32/64-bit), source code is portable and
can be compiled under any platform supporting POSIX threads. The modular
nature of the code allows for easy implementation of new features,
so that the core application can be customized to meet individual needs.
